README.md, before:

srly is a native interface to serial devices for Erlang, known to work
on Mac OS X, FreeBSD and Linux.

The C component of srly simply provides a wrapper to the system serial
interface. Data structures used as arguments to the native C functions
(such as struct termios) are provided as Erlang binaries, allowing
low level control of the serial device.

Stable version: 0.4.7

## COMPILING

    make

## USAGE

_serctl_ is the interface to the native system C libraries and follows
the system C interface.

    serctl:open(Path) -> {ok, FD} | {error, posix()}

        Types   Path = iodata() | {fd, FD}
                FD = resource()

        Opens the serial device (e.g., "/dev/ttyUSB0").

        A previously opened file descriptor can also be used. The fd
        should be opened with the O_NONBLOCK|O_NOCTTY flags.

    serctl:close(FD) -> ok | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()

        Closes the serial device. NOTE: If the process holding open the
        serial device exits, the file descriptor associated with the
        device will automatically be closed.

    serctl:read(FD, Size) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Size = integer()
                Data = binary()

        Read from the serial device. Size is an unsigned long.

    serctl:readx(FD, Size) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}
    serctl:readx(FD, Size, Timeout) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Size = integer()
                Data = binary()
                Timeout = infinity | integer()

        Read exactly Size bytes from the serial device. readx/2 will
        block forever.

        readx/3 accepts a timeout value. The behaviour of readx/3 when
        the timeout is reached is to throw away any buffered data and
        return {error, eintr} to the caller, e.g., the caller will not
        be returned the contents of a partial read. (The justification
        for this behaviour: the caller has stated they require a fixed
        number of bytes so the contents of a partial read represents
        unspecified behaviour.)

    serctl:write(FD, Data) -> ok | {ok, NBytes} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Data = binary()
                NBytes = long()

        Write data to the serial device.

        In the unlikely case of a successful partial write, the number
        of bytes written is returned.

    serctl:ioctl(FD, Request, In) -> {ok, Out} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Request = ulong()
                In = binary()
                Out = binary()

        Perform operations controlling the serial device.

        The In argument is a binary holding the input parameter to the
        device request. The Out parameter will hold the result of the
        request if the ioctl is in/out.


The low level interface follows the C library (see tcgetattr(3),
tcsetattr(3), cfsetispeed(3) and cfsetospeed(3) for details). For
convenience, atoms may be used in places where C has defined macros for
integers and Erlang records can be used as arguments instead of binaries.

To use Erlang records to represent the C struct termios (e.g., when
converting binaries using serctl:termios/1) include their definition:

    -include("serctl.hrl").


    serctl:tcgetattr(FD) -> {ok, Termios} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Termios = binary()

        Get the terminal attributes of the serial device. Returns the
        contents of the system struct termios as a binary.

    serctl:tcsetattr(FD, Action, Termios) -> ok | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Action = integer() | Option | Options
                Options = [Option]
                Option = tcsanow | tcsadrain | tcsaflush
                Termios = binary() | #termios{}

        Sets the terminal attributes of the serial device.

        Warning: the contents of Termios are passed directly to
        tcsettr(3). If the system tcsettr(3) does not perform any
        validation of the structure, it's possible the Erlang VM will
        crash.

    serctl:cfsetispeed(Termios, Speed) -> Termios1

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Speed = integer() | atom()
                Termios1 = binary()

        Set the input speed of the serial device. See the warning for
        tcsetattr/2.

    serctl:cfsetospeed(Termios, Speed) -> Termios1

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Speed = integer() | atom()
                Termios1 = binary()

        Set the input speed of the serial device. See the warning for
        tcsetattr/2.

    serctl:getfd(FD) -> integer()

        Types   FD = resource()

        Returns the file descriptor associated with the NIF resource. The
        file descriptor can be used with erlang:open_port/2.

    serctl:constant() -> Constants
    serctl:constant(Attr) -> integer()

        Types   Constants = [{Attr, integer()}]
                Attr = tiocm_rts | tiocm_dtr | tiocmset | tiocmget | tiocmbis
                | tiocmbic | tcsaflush | tcsadrain | tcsanow | tcioflush
                | tcoflush | tciflush | tcion | tcioff | tcoon | tcooff
                | iexten | tostop | noflsh | echonl | echoke | echok | echoe
                | echo | icanon | isig | crtscts | b1152000 | b1000000
                | b921600 | b576000 | b500000 | b460800 | b230400 | b115200
                | b57600 | clocal | hupcl | parodd | parenb | cread | cstopb
                | cs8 | cs7 | cs6 | cs5 | csize | b38400 | b19200 | b9600
                | b4800 | b2400 | b1800 | b1200 | b600 | b300 | b200 | b150
                | b134 | b110 | b75 | b50 | b0 | ofdel | ofill | onlret
                | onocr | ocrnl | onlcr | olcuc | opost | iutf8 | imaxbel
                | ixoff | ixany | ixon | iuclc | icrnl | igncr | inlcr
                | istrip | inpck | parmrk | ignpar | brkint | ignbrk | veol2
                | vlnext | vwerase | vdiscard | vreprint | veol | vsusp | vstop
                | vstart | vswtc | vmin | vtime | veof | vkill | verase | vquit
                | vintr | nccs

        Map of atoms reprsenting terminal attribute constants to
        integers. Varies across platforms.


serctl has a higher level interface for manipulating the C data structures
that takes care of portability. The structures are represented as Erlang
records. These functions only retrieve or modify values within the termios
structure and do not have side effects when used with the record format
(when binaries are used as arguments, they are first converted to record
format based on a runtime platform check).

To modify the serial device, the attributes must be written out using
serctl:tcsetattr/3.

    serctl:flow(Termios) -> true | false
    serctl:flow(Termios, Bool) -> #termios{}

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Bool = true | false

        flow/1 indicates whether flow control is enabled in a serial
        device's terminal attributes. flow/2 returns a termios structure
        that can be used for setting a serial device's flow control.

    serctl:mode(Mode) -> #termios{}

        Types   Mode = raw

        Returns an Erlang termios record with attributes that can be
        used to put the serial device into raw mode.

    serctl:getflag(Termios, Flag, Opt) -> true | false

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Flag = cflag | lflag | iflag | oflag
                Opt = atom()

        Returns whether a flag is enabled. Opt is one of the atoms
        returned using serctl:constant/0.

    serctl:setflag(Termios, Opt) -> #termios{}

        Types   Termios = #termios{}
                Opt = [Param]
                Param = {Flag, [Val]}
                Flag = cflag | lflag | iflag | oflag
                Val = {atom(), Bool}
                Bool = true | false

        Returns an Erlang termios record which can be used for setting
        the attributes of a serial device. For example, to create
        attributes that can be used to enable hardware flow control on
        a serial device:

            {ok, FD} = serctl:open("/dev/ttyUSB0"),
            {ok, Termios} = serctl:tcgetattr(FD),
            Termios1 = serctl:setflag(Termios, [{cflag, [{crtscts, true}]}]),
            ok = serctl:tcsetattr(FD, tcsanow, Termios1).

    serctl:ispeed(Termios) -> integer()
    serctl:ispeed(Termios, Speed) -> #termios{} | binary()
    serctl:ospeed(Termios) -> integer()
    serctl:ospeed(Termios, Speed) -> #termios{} | binary()

        Types   Termios = #termios{}
                Speed = integer()

        ispeed/1 and ospeed/1 return the input and output speed of the
        serial device. Note the speed returned is the constant defined
        for the system and may differ between platforms.

        ispeed/2 and ospeed/2 return an Erlang termios record that can be
        used for setting the input and output speed of the serial device.

    serctl:baud(Speed) -> integer()

        Types   Speed = 115200 | 19200 | 9600 | ...

        Convenience function returning the constant defined for the baud
        rate for the platform.

    serctl:termios(Termios) -> #termios{} | binary()

        Types   Termios = #termios{} | binary()

        Converts between the C struct termios and the Erlang record
        representation.


## EXAMPLES

* Connect to an Arduino at 9600

        % Open the serial device
        {ok, FD} = serctl:open("/dev/ttyUSB0"),

        % Set the terminal attributes to:
        %   raw, no hardware flow control, 9600
        Termios = lists:foldl(
            fun(Fun, Acc) -> Fun(Acc) end,
            serctl:mode(raw),
            [
                fun(N) -> serctl:flow(N, false) end,
                fun(N) -> serctl:ispeed(N, b9600) end,
                fun(N) -> serctl:ospeed(N, b9600) end
            ]
        ),

        ok = serctl:tcsetattr(FD, tcsanow, Termios),

        % Write 1 byte to the arduino
        ok = serctl:write(FD, <<1:8>>),

        % Read 2 bytes from the arduino (little-endian integer)
        {ok, <<Data:2/little-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:read(FD, 2).

* Resetting DTR/RTS

        TIOCMGET = serctl:constant(tiocmget),
        TIOCMSET = serctl:constant(tiocmset),
        TIOCM_DTR = serctl:constant(tiocm_dtr),
        TIOCM_RTS = serctl:constant(tiocm_rts),

        % Get the currrent device settings
        {ok, <<Ctl:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMGET,
            <<0:32>>
        ),

        Off = Ctl band bnot ( TIOCM_DTR bor TIOCM_RTS ),

        {ok, <<Ctl1:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMSET,
            <<Off:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>
        ),

        On = Ctl1 bor ( TIOCM_DTR bor TIOCM_RTS ),

        serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMSET,
            <<On:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>
        ).

* See the examples directory. The code here is adapted from:

    http://blog.listincomprehension.com/2010/04/accessing-arduino-from-erlang.html

    * examples/strobe

        Serially turn on/off a row of LEDs.

    * examples/ldr

        Read values from an LDR.


## TODO

* document srly

* test if the system C interface can actually be crashed!

* srly should be a well behaved OTP application that can deal with the
  addition and removal of USB serial ports

Commit message:

serctl: fix handling of invalid constants
A bug in the handling of non-portable/invalid constants would result
in an infinite loop. Better define the behaviour of atoms when used as
constants:

* tcsetattr/3

  If the action atom is not supported on this platform, return
  {error,unsupported}. The documentation lists only 3 valid atoms
  (tcsanow, tcsadrain, tcsaflush), however it is possible that some
  platforms may support other actions (e.g., TCSASOFT on the BSDs).

* cfsetispeed/2, cfsetospeed/2, ispeed/2, ospeed/2

  These functions do not return an error. Use of an invalid speed on
  this platform will generate a badarg. Portable code will have to
  either test the atom using constant/1 or catch the badarg.

README.md, after:

srly is a native interface to serial devices for Erlang, known to work
on Mac OS X, FreeBSD and Linux.

The C component of srly simply provides a wrapper to the system serial
interface. Data structures used as arguments to the native C functions
(such as struct termios) are provided as Erlang binaries, allowing
low level control of the serial device.

Stable version: 0.5.0

## COMPILING

    make

## USAGE

_serctl_ is the interface to the native system C libraries and follows
the system C interface.

    serctl:open(Path) -> {ok, FD} | {error, posix()}

        Types   Path = iodata() | {fd, FD}
                FD = resource()

        Opens the serial device (e.g., "/dev/ttyUSB0").

        A previously opened file descriptor can also be used. The fd
        should be opened with the O_NONBLOCK|O_NOCTTY flags.

    serctl:close(FD) -> ok | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()

        Closes the serial device. NOTE: If the process holding open the
        serial device exits, the file descriptor associated with the
        device will automatically be closed.

    serctl:read(FD, Size) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Size = integer()
                Data = binary()

        Read from the serial device. Size is an unsigned long.

    serctl:readx(FD, Size) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}
    serctl:readx(FD, Size, Timeout) -> {ok, Data} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Size = integer()
                Data = binary()
                Timeout = infinity | integer()

        Read exactly Size bytes from the serial device. readx/2 will
        block forever.

        readx/3 accepts a timeout value. The behaviour of readx/3 when
        the timeout is reached is to throw away any buffered data and
        return {error, eintr} to the caller, e.g., the caller will not
        be returned the contents of a partial read. (The justification
        for this behaviour: the caller has stated they require a fixed
        number of bytes so the contents of a partial read represents
        unspecified behaviour.)

    serctl:write(FD, Data) -> ok | {ok, NBytes} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Data = binary()
                NBytes = long()

        Write data to the serial device.

        In the unlikely case of a successful partial write, the number
        of bytes written is returned.

    serctl:ioctl(FD, Request, In) -> {ok, Out} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Request = ulong()
                In = binary()
                Out = binary()

        Perform operations controlling the serial device.

        The In argument is a binary holding the input parameter to the
        device request. The Out parameter will hold the result of the
        request if the ioctl is in/out.


The low level interface follows the C library (see tcgetattr(3),
tcsetattr(3), cfsetispeed(3) and cfsetospeed(3) for details). For
convenience, atoms may be used in places where C has defined macros for
integers and Erlang records can be used as arguments instead of binaries.

To use Erlang records to represent the C struct termios (e.g., when
converting binaries using serctl:termios/1) include their definition:

    -include("serctl.hrl").


    serctl:tcgetattr(FD) -> {ok, Termios} | {error, posix()}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Termios = binary()

        Get the terminal attributes of the serial device. Returns the
        contents of the system struct termios as a binary.

    serctl:tcsetattr(FD, Action, Termios) -> ok | {error, posix() | unsupported}

        Types   FD = resource()
                Action = integer() | Option | Options
                Options = [Option]
                Option = tcsanow | tcsadrain | tcsaflush
                Termios = binary() | #termios{}

        Sets the terminal attributes of the serial device.

        Warning: the contents of Termios are passed directly to
        tcsettr(3). If the system tcsettr(3) does not perform any
        validation of the structure, it's possible the Erlang VM will
        crash.

    serctl:cfsetispeed(Termios, Speed) -> Termios1

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Speed = integer() | atom()
                Termios1 = binary()

        Set the input speed of the serial device. See the warning for
        tcsetattr/2.

        Failure: badarg if Speed is an invalid atom.

    serctl:cfsetospeed(Termios, Speed) -> Termios1

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Speed = integer() | atom()
                Termios1 = binary()

        Set the input speed of the serial device. See the warning for
        tcsetattr/2.

        Failure: badarg if Speed is an invalid atom.

    serctl:getfd(FD) -> integer()

        Types   FD = resource()

        Returns the file descriptor associated with the NIF resource. The
        file descriptor can be used with erlang:open_port/2.

    serctl:constant() -> Constants
    serctl:constant(Attr) -> integer()

        Types   Constants = [{Attr, integer()}]
                Attr = tiocm_rts | tiocm_dtr | tiocmset | tiocmget | tiocmbis
                | tiocmbic | tcsaflush | tcsadrain | tcsanow | tcioflush
                | tcoflush | tciflush | tcion | tcioff | tcoon | tcooff
                | iexten | tostop | noflsh | echonl | echoke | echok | echoe
                | echo | icanon | isig | crtscts | b1152000 | b1000000
                | b921600 | b576000 | b500000 | b460800 | b230400 | b115200
                | b57600 | clocal | hupcl | parodd | parenb | cread | cstopb
                | cs8 | cs7 | cs6 | cs5 | csize | b38400 | b19200 | b9600
                | b4800 | b2400 | b1800 | b1200 | b600 | b300 | b200 | b150
                | b134 | b110 | b75 | b50 | b0 | ofdel | ofill | onlret
                | onocr | ocrnl | onlcr | olcuc | opost | iutf8 | imaxbel
                | ixoff | ixany | ixon | iuclc | icrnl | igncr | inlcr
                | istrip | inpck | parmrk | ignpar | brkint | ignbrk | veol2
                | vlnext | vwerase | vdiscard | vreprint | veol | vsusp | vstop
                | vstart | vswtc | vmin | vtime | veof | vkill | verase | vquit
                | vintr | nccs

        Map of atoms reprsenting terminal attribute constants to
        integers. Varies across platforms.


serctl has a higher level interface for manipulating the C data structures
that takes care of portability. The structures are represented as Erlang
records. These functions only retrieve or modify values within the termios
structure and do not have side effects when used with the record format
(when binaries are used as arguments, they are first converted to record
format based on a runtime platform check).

To modify the serial device, the attributes must be written out using
serctl:tcsetattr/3.

    serctl:flow(Termios) -> true | false
    serctl:flow(Termios, Bool) -> #termios{}

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Bool = true | false

        flow/1 indicates whether flow control is enabled in a serial
        device's terminal attributes. flow/2 returns a termios structure
        that can be used for setting a serial device's flow control.

    serctl:mode(Mode) -> #termios{}

        Types   Mode = raw

        Returns an Erlang termios record with attributes that can be
        used to put the serial device into raw mode.

    serctl:getflag(Termios, Flag, Opt) -> true | false

        Types   Termios = binary() | #termios{}
                Flag = cflag | lflag | iflag | oflag
                Opt = atom()

        Returns whether a flag is enabled. Opt is one of the atoms
        returned using serctl:constant/0.

    serctl:setflag(Termios, Opt) -> #termios{}

        Types   Termios = #termios{}
                Opt = [Param]
                Param = {Flag, [Val]}
                Flag = cflag | lflag | iflag | oflag
                Val = {atom(), Bool}
                Bool = true | false

        Returns an Erlang termios record which can be used for setting
        the attributes of a serial device. For example, to create
        attributes that can be used to enable hardware flow control on
        a serial device:

            {ok, FD} = serctl:open("/dev/ttyUSB0"),
            {ok, Termios} = serctl:tcgetattr(FD),
            Termios1 = serctl:setflag(Termios, [{cflag, [{crtscts, true}]}]),
            ok = serctl:tcsetattr(FD, tcsanow, Termios1).

    serctl:ispeed(Termios) -> integer()
    serctl:ispeed(Termios, Speed) -> #termios{} | binary()
    serctl:ospeed(Termios) -> integer()
    serctl:ospeed(Termios, Speed) -> #termios{} | binary()

        Types   Termios = #termios{}
                Speed = integer() | atom()

        ispeed/1 and ospeed/1 return the input and output speed of the
        serial device. Note the speed returned is the constant defined
        for the system and may differ between platforms.

        ispeed/2 and ospeed/2 return an Erlang termios record that can be
        used for setting the input and output speed of the serial device.

        Failure: badarg if Speed is an invalid atom.

    serctl:baud(Speed) -> integer()

        Types   Speed = 115200 | 19200 | 9600 | ...

        Convenience function returning the constant defined for the baud
        rate for the platform.

    serctl:termios(Termios) -> #termios{} | binary()

        Types   Termios = #termios{} | binary()

        Converts between the C struct termios and the Erlang record
        representation.


## EXAMPLES

* Connect to an Arduino at 9600

        % Open the serial device
        {ok, FD} = serctl:open("/dev/ttyUSB0"),

        % Set the terminal attributes to:
        %   raw, no hardware flow control, 9600
        Termios = lists:foldl(
            fun(Fun, Acc) -> Fun(Acc) end,
            serctl:mode(raw),
            [
                fun(N) -> serctl:flow(N, false) end,
                fun(N) -> serctl:ispeed(N, b9600) end,
                fun(N) -> serctl:ospeed(N, b9600) end
            ]
        ),

        ok = serctl:tcsetattr(FD, tcsanow, Termios),

        % Write 1 byte to the arduino
        ok = serctl:write(FD, <<1:8>>),

        % Read 2 bytes from the arduino (little-endian integer)
        {ok, <<Data:2/little-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:read(FD, 2).

* Resetting DTR/RTS

        TIOCMGET = serctl:constant(tiocmget),
        TIOCMSET = serctl:constant(tiocmset),
        TIOCM_DTR = serctl:constant(tiocm_dtr),
        TIOCM_RTS = serctl:constant(tiocm_rts),

        % Get the currrent device settings
        {ok, <<Ctl:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMGET,
            <<0:32>>
        ),

        Off = Ctl band bnot ( TIOCM_DTR bor TIOCM_RTS ),

        {ok, <<Ctl1:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>} = serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMSET,
            <<Off:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>
        ),

        On = Ctl1 bor ( TIOCM_DTR bor TIOCM_RTS ),

        serctl:ioctl(
            FD,
            TIOCMSET,
            <<On:4/native-unsigned-integer-unit:8>>
        ).

* See the examples directory. The code here is adapted from:

    http://blog.listincomprehension.com/2010/04/accessing-arduino-from-erlang.html

    * examples/strobe

        Serially turn on/off a row of LEDs.

    * examples/ldr

        Read values from an LDR.


## TODO

* document srly

* test if the system C interface can actually be crashed!

* srly should be a well behaved OTP application that can deal with the
  addition and removal of USB serial ports
